README.md, before:

# Azure DevOps MCP Server

A Model Context Protocol (MCP) server implementation for Azure DevOps, allowing AI assistants to interact with Azure DevOps APIs through a standardized protocol.

## Overview

This server implements the [Model Context Protocol (MCP)](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/) for Azure DevOps, enabling AI assistants like Claude to interact with Azure DevOps resources securely. The server acts as a bridge between AI models and Azure DevOps APIs, providing a standardized way to:

- Access and manage projects, work items, repositories, and more
- Create and update work items, branches, and pull requests
- Execute common DevOps workflows through natural language
- Safely authenticate and interact with Azure DevOps resources

## Server Structure

The server is structured around the Model Context Protocol (MCP) for communicating with AI assistants. It provides tools for interacting with Azure DevOps resources including:

- Projects
- Work Items
- Repositories
- Pull Requests
- Branches
- Pipelines

### Core Components

- **AzureDevOpsServer**: Main server class that initializes the MCP server and registers tools
- **Tool Handlers**: Modular functions for each Azure DevOps operation
- **Configuration**: Environment-based configuration for organization URL, PAT, etc.

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Node.js (v16+)
- npm or yarn
- Azure DevOps account with appropriate access
- Authentication credentials (see [Authentication Guide](docs/authentication.md) for details):
  - Personal Access Token (PAT), or
  - Azure Identity credentials, or
  - Azure CLI login

### Installation

1. Clone the repository:
   ```
   git clone https://github.com/your-username/azure-devops-mcp.git
   cd azure-devops-mcp
   ```

2. Install dependencies:
   ```
   npm install
   ```

3. Set up your environment:

   Option A: Using the automated setup script (recommended):
   ```
   chmod +x setup_env.sh
   ./setup_env.sh
   ```
   This script will:
   - Check for and install the Azure CLI DevOps extension if needed
   - Let you select from your available Azure DevOps organizations
   - Optionally set a default project
   - Create a Personal Access Token with the required permissions
   - Generate your `.env` file with the correct settings

   Option B: Manual setup:
   ```
   cp .env.example .env
   ```
   Then edit the `.env` file with your Azure DevOps credentials (see Authentication section below).

### Running the Server

Build the TypeScript files:
```
npm run build
```

Start the server:
```
npm start
```

For development with hot reloading:
```
npm run dev
```

## Authentication Methods

This server supports multiple authentication methods for connecting to Azure DevOps APIs. For detailed setup instructions, configuration examples, and troubleshooting tips, see the [Authentication Guide](docs/authentication.md).

### Supported Authentication Methods

1. **Personal Access Token (PAT)** - Simple token-based authentication
2. **Azure Identity (DefaultAzureCredential)** - Flexible authentication using the Azure Identity SDK
3. **Azure CLI** - Authentication using your Azure CLI login

Example configuration files for each authentication method are available in the [examples directory](docs/examples/).

## Environment Variables

For a complete list of environment variables and their descriptions, see the [Authentication Guide](docs/authentication.md#configuration-reference).

Key environment variables include:

| Variable | Description | Required | Default |
|----------|-------------|----------|---------|
| `AZURE_DEVOPS_AUTH_METHOD` | Authentication method (`pat`, `azure-identity`, or `azure-cli`) | No | `azure-identity` |
| `AZURE_DEVOPS_ORG` | Azure DevOps organization name | No | Extracted from URL |
| `AZURE_DEVOPS_ORG_URL` | Full URL to your Azure DevOps organization | Yes | - |
| `AZURE_DEVOPS_PAT` | Personal Access Token (for PAT auth) | Only with PAT auth | - |
| `AZURE_DEVOPS_DEFAULT_PROJECT` | Default project if none specified | No | - |
| `AZURE_DEVOPS_API_VERSION` | API version to use | No | Latest |
| `AZURE_AD_TENANT_ID` | Azure AD tenant ID (for AAD auth) | Only with AAD auth | - |
| `AZURE_AD_CLIENT_ID` | Azure AD application ID (for AAD auth) | Only with AAD auth | - |
| `AZURE_AD_CLIENT_SECRET` | Azure AD client secret (for AAD auth) | Only with AAD auth | - |
| `PORT` | Server port | No | 3000 |
| `HOST` | Server host | No | localhost |
| `LOG_LEVEL` | Logging level (debug, info, warn, error) | No | info |

## Troubleshooting Authentication

For detailed troubleshooting information for each authentication method, see the [Authentication Guide](docs/authentication.md#troubleshooting-authentication-issues).

Common issues include:
- Invalid or expired credentials
- Insufficient permissions
- Network connectivity problems
- Configuration errors

## Authentication Implementation Details

For technical details about how authentication is implemented in the Azure DevOps MCP server, see the [Authentication Guide](docs/authentication.md) and the source code in the `src/auth` directory.

## Available Tools

The Azure DevOps MCP server provides a variety of tools for interacting with Azure DevOps resources. For detailed documentation on each tool, please refer to the corresponding documentation.

### Core Navigation Tools
- `list_organizations`: List all accessible organizations
- `list_projects`: List all accessible projects
- `list_repositories`: List all repositories in a project

For comprehensive documentation on all core navigation tools, see the [Core Navigation Tools Guide](docs/tools/core-navigation.md).

### Project Tools
- `get_project`: Get details of a specific project

For project-specific tool documentation, see the [Projects Tools Guide](docs/tools/projects.md).

### Repository Tools
- `get_repository`: Get repository details

For repository-specific tool documentation, see the [Repositories Tools Guide](docs/tools/repositories.md).

### Work Item Tools
- `get_work_item`: Retrieve a work item by ID
- `create_work_item`: Create a new work item

## Testing

### Unit Tests

Run unit tests with:

```bash
npm run test:unit
```

### Integration Tests

Integration tests require a connection to a real Azure DevOps instance. To run them:

1. Ensure your `.env` file is configured with valid Azure DevOps credentials:
   ```
   AZURE_DEVOPS_ORG_URL=https://dev.azure.com/your-organization
   AZURE_DEVOPS_PAT=your-personal-access-token
   AZURE_DEVOPS_DEFAULT_PROJECT=your-project-name
   ```

2. Run the integration tests:
   ```bash
   npm run test:integration
   ```

### CI Environment

For running tests in CI environments (like GitHub Actions), see [CI Environment Setup](docs/ci-setup.md) for instructions on configuring secrets.

## Development

This project follows Test-Driven Development practices. Each new feature should:

1. Begin with a failing test
2. Implement the minimal code to make the test pass
3. Refactor while keeping tests green

## License

MIT

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request.

Commit message:

Add detailed attribution and modification guidelines to README and include LICENSE file

README.md, after:

# Azure DevOps MCP Server

A Model Context Protocol (MCP) server implementation for Azure DevOps, allowing AI assistants to interact with Azure DevOps APIs through a standardized protocol.

## Overview

This server implements the [Model Context Protocol (MCP)](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/) for Azure DevOps, enabling AI assistants like Claude to interact with Azure DevOps resources securely. The server acts as a bridge between AI models and Azure DevOps APIs, providing a standardized way to:

- Access and manage projects, work items, repositories, and more
- Create and update work items, branches, and pull requests
- Execute common DevOps workflows through natural language
- Safely authenticate and interact with Azure DevOps resources

## Server Structure

The server is structured around the Model Context Protocol (MCP) for communicating with AI assistants. It provides tools for interacting with Azure DevOps resources including:

- Projects
- Work Items
- Repositories
- Pull Requests
- Branches
- Pipelines

### Core Components

- **AzureDevOpsServer**: Main server class that initializes the MCP server and registers tools
- **Tool Handlers**: Modular functions for each Azure DevOps operation
- **Configuration**: Environment-based configuration for organization URL, PAT, etc.

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Node.js (v16+)
- npm or yarn
- Azure DevOps account with appropriate access
- Authentication credentials (see [Authentication Guide](docs/authentication.md) for details):
  - Personal Access Token (PAT), or
  - Azure Identity credentials, or
  - Azure CLI login

### Installation

1. Clone the repository:
   ```
   git clone https://github.com/your-username/azure-devops-mcp.git
   cd azure-devops-mcp
   ```

2. Install dependencies:
   ```
   npm install
   ```

3. Set up your environment:

   Option A: Using the automated setup script (recommended):
   ```
   chmod +x setup_env.sh
   ./setup_env.sh
   ```
   This script will:
   - Check for and install the Azure CLI DevOps extension if needed
   - Let you select from your available Azure DevOps organizations
   - Optionally set a default project
   - Create a Personal Access Token with the required permissions
   - Generate your `.env` file with the correct settings

   Option B: Manual setup:
   ```
   cp .env.example .env
   ```
   Then edit the `.env` file with your Azure DevOps credentials (see Authentication section below).

### Running the Server

Build the TypeScript files:
```
npm run build
```

Start the server:
```
npm start
```

For development with hot reloading:
```
npm run dev
```

## Authentication Methods

This server supports multiple authentication methods for connecting to Azure DevOps APIs. For detailed setup instructions, configuration examples, and troubleshooting tips, see the [Authentication Guide](docs/authentication.md).

### Supported Authentication Methods

1. **Personal Access Token (PAT)** - Simple token-based authentication
2. **Azure Identity (DefaultAzureCredential)** - Flexible authentication using the Azure Identity SDK
3. **Azure CLI** - Authentication using your Azure CLI login

Example configuration files for each authentication method are available in the [examples directory](docs/examples/).

## Environment Variables

For a complete list of environment variables and their descriptions, see the [Authentication Guide](docs/authentication.md#configuration-reference).

Key environment variables include:

| Variable | Description | Required | Default |
|----------|-------------|----------|---------|
| `AZURE_DEVOPS_AUTH_METHOD` | Authentication method (`pat`, `azure-identity`, or `azure-cli`) | No | `azure-identity` |
| `AZURE_DEVOPS_ORG` | Azure DevOps organization name | No | Extracted from URL |
| `AZURE_DEVOPS_ORG_URL` | Full URL to your Azure DevOps organization | Yes | - |
| `AZURE_DEVOPS_PAT` | Personal Access Token (for PAT auth) | Only with PAT auth | - |
| `AZURE_DEVOPS_DEFAULT_PROJECT` | Default project if none specified | No | - |
| `AZURE_DEVOPS_API_VERSION` | API version to use | No | Latest |
| `AZURE_AD_TENANT_ID` | Azure AD tenant ID (for AAD auth) | Only with AAD auth | - |
| `AZURE_AD_CLIENT_ID` | Azure AD application ID (for AAD auth) | Only with AAD auth | - |
| `AZURE_AD_CLIENT_SECRET` | Azure AD client secret (for AAD auth) | Only with AAD auth | - |
| `PORT` | Server port | No | 3000 |
| `HOST` | Server host | No | localhost |
| `LOG_LEVEL` | Logging level (debug, info, warn, error) | No | info |

## Troubleshooting Authentication

For detailed troubleshooting information for each authentication method, see the [Authentication Guide](docs/authentication.md#troubleshooting-authentication-issues).

Common issues include:
- Invalid or expired credentials
- Insufficient permissions
- Network connectivity problems
- Configuration errors

## Authentication Implementation Details

For technical details about how authentication is implemented in the Azure DevOps MCP server, see the [Authentication Guide](docs/authentication.md) and the source code in the `src/auth` directory.

## Available Tools

The Azure DevOps MCP server provides a variety of tools for interacting with Azure DevOps resources. For detailed documentation on each tool, please refer to the corresponding documentation.

### Core Navigation Tools
- `list_organizations`: List all accessible organizations
- `list_projects`: List all accessible projects
- `list_repositories`: List all repositories in a project

For comprehensive documentation on all core navigation tools, see the [Core Navigation Tools Guide](docs/tools/core-navigation.md).

### Project Tools
- `get_project`: Get details of a specific project

For project-specific tool documentation, see the [Projects Tools Guide](docs/tools/projects.md).

### Repository Tools
- `get_repository`: Get repository details

For repository-specific tool documentation, see the [Repositories Tools Guide](docs/tools/repositories.md).

### Work Item Tools
- `get_work_item`: Retrieve a work item by ID
- `create_work_item`: Create a new work item

## Testing

### Unit Tests

Run unit tests with:

```bash
npm run test:unit
```

### Integration Tests

Integration tests require a connection to a real Azure DevOps instance. To run them:

1. Ensure your `.env` file is configured with valid Azure DevOps credentials:
   ```
   AZURE_DEVOPS_ORG_URL=https://dev.azure.com/your-organization
   AZURE_DEVOPS_PAT=your-personal-access-token
   AZURE_DEVOPS_DEFAULT_PROJECT=your-project-name
   ```

2. Run the integration tests:
   ```bash
   npm run test:integration
   ```

### CI Environment

For running tests in CI environments (like GitHub Actions), see [CI Environment Setup](docs/ci-setup.md) for instructions on configuring secrets.

## Development

This project follows Test-Driven Development practices. Each new feature should:

1. Begin with a failing test
2. Implement the minimal code to make the test pass
3. Refactor while keeping tests green

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](./LICENSE) file for full details.

### Attribution and Modifications

This software was originally created by the azure-devops-mcp contributors. When using, modifying, or redistributing this software:

- You must include the original LICENSE file
- You must maintain the original copyright notice
- If you modify the code, clearly state your modifications and their dates
- Attribution to the original project is required

### Using in CLINE's MCP Servers Marketplace

When publishing this project to CLINE's MCP servers marketplace:

1. Reference the original project
2. Include the original MIT License
3. Clearly document any modifications made
4. Maintain all original documentation while marking any changes

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request.
